180 (no. 179 omitted). Account of a Tour of the Continent, after May
1833 and into 1834. MSS IA, VII, VIII, IX, XI. Selections printed PJR, 1:119-
63, 283-85; and more fully in Works, 2:340-87. Drawings, besides those
included in Works, reproduced in WS, pl. 23a. Early publication of
 Andernacht  and  St. Goar  as  Fragments from a Metrical Journal  in
Friendship’s Offering, 1835 (i.e., apparently the Friendship’s Offering for
1836 is intended; see Works, 2:353-54 n. 2; 38:4). Early publication of
 Ehrenbreitstein / Fragment from a Metrical Journal. / (Aetat 16.)  in Poems,
8-12.
     Although this travelogue has come to be known familiarly as the Account
of a Tour of the Continent, no title is assigned to the sequence as a whole in
any of the manuscripts; titles are given only to some individual sections.
Ruskin began drafting the sections during or after the family’s 1833
Continental tour, partly in MS VIII--a notebook that had been used previously
(and continued to be used through 1836) for rough copy--and partly elsewhere,
perhaps on loose sheets, now lost, judging by evidence in MS IA. Among the
assorted loose items in MS IA are copies of selected sections of the poem,
copies that are probably earlier than their final fair copies in MS IX, but
that appear too neat to represent first draft. Parts of these copies are in
John James’s hand; likewise, other portions of the poem in MSS VII and XI are
fair-copied by hands other than Ruskin’s, possibly his mother’s or Mary
Richardson’s.
     Toward the end of the drafts of sections in MS VIII, and mixed in with
them, there occur drafts of the birthday poems for John James, nos. 188 and
192, establishing that Ruskin was drafting the Account well into 1834. Fair-
copying in MS IX (with the remarkably exacting pencil imitations of line
engravings pasted in) was perhaps carried on throughout 1834, judging by the
scarcity of other work from that year. It is possible, however, that the fair
copy had been largely completed through its Rhine journey sections during the
winter of 1833 and early 1834. Following the incompletely fair-copied prose
section on Heidelberg, which was the last section to be fair-copied, MS IX
contains only drawings, some of which appear inspired by Ruskin’s birthday
gift of 22 February 1834, William Brockendon’s Illustrations of the Passes of
the Alps. It is as if, enthralled by his new book, Ruskin desired only to try
his hand at such illustrations as Brockendon’s,  carrying me again over the
summits of the higher Alps, over the winding paths of Splugen, and the
glaciered crest of the Simplon, and the summmer snows of the St Bernard, and
the lovely plains of gentle Italy  (RFL 278). This hypothesis--that Ruskin had
been steadily fair-copying and drawing in MS IX, until his attention was
captured by imitating Brockendon in late February 1834--appears corroborated
by comparing the sequence of sections in the fair copy against the progress of
draft in MS VIII.
     To facilitate the following comparisons of fair copy with rough draft,
Table 1 arranges the sections of the Account in columns according to
manuscript. Column ?, listing MS IX, the illustrated fair copy, should be read
as the base column, for only here are the sections listed in the order they
appear in manuscript. Other manuscript copies of sections (in IA, VII, VIII,
and XI) are matched against the base column in order to establish the
relationship between drafting and fair-copying. Thus, the columns for MSS IA,
VII, VIII, and XI do not show the sequential order of sections in those
manuscripts, but the sequences can be inferred from column ?, which lists
Ruskin’s continuous line numbering.
     Ruskin’s line numbering, which he used in MSS IA and VIII, is carried
sequentially throughout the poems; i.e., he did not start his numbering anew
with each poem but numbered continuously from poem to poem, skipping over the
prose draft. Presumably the system served Ruskin as a guide to fair-copying.
In the fair copy, MS IX, he left some pages blank for prose or poetry to be
added later but pasted in illustrations, and he filled other pages with
writing but left blank spaces for illustrations. To work in this piecemeal
manner, he must have known the length of the sections to be copied--hence, his
line numbering. It is tempting to declare that the numbering also establishes
the sequence of composition; however, the numbering could have been added at
any time after the poems’ drafting. 

; however, the order of sections in these manuscripts is more conveniently
listed in Part 1. For other directions to interpreting Table 1, see the notes
at the bottom of the table.)
     The chronology of composition is equally conjectural, since Ruskin left
no dates on draft or fair copy. The first five poems of the travelogue
( Calais,   Cassel,   Lille,   Brussels,  and  The Meuse ), without their
respective prose sections, appear on two sheets in MS IA in the order they are
fair-copied in the illustrated version, MS IX (see part 1, MS IA,  Content, 
g). These sheets are mostly in Ruskin’s hand but partly in John James’s. What
stage of draft they represent cannot be determined, except that they probably
predate the fair-copy MS IX, since they share a characteristic of the MS VIII
draft--namely, Ruskin’s line numbering, The line numbering on the two MS IA
sheets containing the first five poems begins at one and carries through 173
for the first four poems; the fifth poem,  The Meuse,  is unnumbered, because
it is crowded sideways on the second sheet, with no space left for numbering.
     One might infer from these two sheets in MS IA containing the initial
poems of the Account that Ruskin composed substantial portions of the verse
prior to the prose. Such a conclusion cannot be warranted, however, in absence
of the purpose of these sheets. Another folded sheet in MS IA does contain a
prose section,  Calais,  as well as the poems  Passing the Alps,   Milan
Cathedral,   Andernacht,  and  St. Goar  (see part 1, MS IA,  Content,  g).
Like the other sheets in MS IA, this appears to be a semifinal copy, to which
Ruskin has assigned sequential line numbers to the all the poems (i.e., not
poem by poem). Like the other two sheets in MS IA, this sheet is undateable
authoritatively, although it probably belongs to 1834: its unique copies of
 Passing the Alps  and  Milan Cathedral  suggest a later stage of composition,
following the Rhine journey poems that end the fair copy in MS IX; but the
sheet cannot be very late, since its versions of  Andernacht  and  St. Goar 
are the original poems, not the later versions as revised for Friendship’s
Offering, published in 1835.
     The pieces fair-copied in MS VII cannot be dated, except as probably
postdating the last use of that notebook for the fair copy of  Athens.  Since
the draft of that epic was abandoned in 1832, prior to the Account project,
this lower limiting date is of no use.
     Only the MS VIII pieces are unquestionably rough drafts and probably
more or less sequential, therefore providing clues to the order of
composition, if not precise dates. Also, on the back endpapers of MS VIII,
Ruskin entered a list of proposed sections of the poem (reproduced in WS, pl.
6b).
     Table 1 shows that the first draft sections in MS VIII to be fair-copied
in MS IX were the prose sections on Andernacht and St. Goar. At this stage MS
IX falters to a halt, with spaces for drawings left blank, and the fair copy
following St. Goar--on Heidelberg--left incomplete. Since the fter St. Goar,
the Meuse, Cologne, and Brussels--respectively, the fourth, fifth, eleventh,
twelfth, fifteenth and seventeenth Account-related entries in MS VIII. This
may suggest, though with no certainty, that by the time Ruskin was about
halfway into the MS VIII draft (i.e., the fifteenth and seventeenth of thirty-
seven items in MS VIII), he had already begun fair-copying and illustrating MS
IX, i.e., the poetry and prose sections of  Calais,   Cassel,   Lille, 
 Brussels,   Meuse,   Aix-la-Chapelle,   Cologne,   Andernacht, 
 Ehrenbreitstein,   St. Goar,  and  Heidelberg.  (Note that MS IX’s relatively
late prose sections for  Andernacht  and  St. Goar  occur quite early in MS
VIII, the fourth and fifth entries, while  Aix-la-Chapelle  and
 Ehrenbreitstein  and  Heidelberg  occur later among the MS VIII entries,
scattered between the twenty-first and thirty-third.)
     Since the verse portions of the five opening sections of MS IX exist in
MS IA copy, one might hazard that Ruskin began by drafting, fair-copying, and
illustrating the Account as a response to Samuel Prout’s Sketches in Flanders
and Germany. MS VIII, despite its drafts related to the German stages of the
journey, appears more closely modeled on Samuel Rogers’s Italy. Putting aside
the prose sections on Andernacht and St. Goar, MS VIII begins with a cluster
of mountain pieces--the Arveron and Arve pieces, the sighting of the Alps from
Schaffhausen, the crossing of the Alps into Italy--and then roughly alternates
Italian and Swiss with German descriptions.
     In the absence of benchmark dates except at the point when Ruskin paused
amid the  Tour  in MS VIII to compose his father’s birthday poems for 1834
(see app. A, MS VIII,  Content,  [b]), various scenarios are possible.
Unquestionably, the fair-copying in MS IX was begun at home, following the
journey, since sections as early as  Lille  comment on Italian stages of the
itenerary (although the tipped-in drawings conceivably could have been started
during the journey). This fair-copying may have started from draft, now lost
though possibly represented by sheets in MS IA, that could have been composed
during the journey itself, or soon following it. If so, the draft in MS VIII
shows Ruskin composing for the on-going fair-copying of Lowland and German
sections and, simultaneously, for the later largely Swiss and Italian sections
that were never fair-copied. (Ruskin did, however, place illustrations, with
no text, in MS IX that depict mountain and lake scenes for the later sections;
see Works 2:364 n. 1. For these sketches, he also put to use an older rough-
draft notebook, MS VI; see app. A,  Content  [e].) The illustration of the
Swiss passages could have been spurred, not only by Rogers’s Italy, but also
by William Brockendon’s Illustrations of the Passes of the Alps and H. B.
Saussure’s Voyages dans les Alpes, both of which Ruskin received for his
birthday in February 1834 (RFL 278).
     Alternatively, MS VIII could represent Ruskin’s initial poetic response
to the Continent--the sublimities of the Alps and the Italian lakes, mediated
by Scott, Rogers, and Byron, taking precedence over the Proutian picturesque.
(Even the early occurring  Andernacht  and  St. Goar  prose sections concern
the psychology of mountain and hill viewing.)