MS IA
     Yale (in box labeled  Ruskin, John, 1819-1900 / Miscellaneous
Manuscripts  containing a folder,  Early Poems IA,  but also containing
folders for other items that were probably originally bound in IA, as well as
folders unrelated to IA). Dates of contents of original MS IA range from 1827
or 1828 to 1842.

Provenance
     Sotheby’s 1931. In the aftermath of Goodspeed’s fire, MS IA was
discovered and delivered to Yale, as explained in a letter of 4 November 1942
from Goodspeed to Chauncey B. Tinker (typed on stationery of Goodspeed’s Book
Shop, No. 18 Beacon Street, Boston, Massachusetts, and now included in a
folder labeled  The Monastery  in the box  Miscellaneous Manuscripts  [see
below,  Description,  and  Content,  a]).

     Prof. Chauncey B. Tinker
     1293 Davenport College
     New Haven, Connecticut

     Dear Prof. Tinker:
          Yesterday in rummaging about my library I was happy to come upon a
     folder of Ruskin manuscripts which I knew had escaped destruction, but
     which I had been unable to locate. I am sending them to you to go with
     the others. To me they are of particular interest, and they include one
     piece which, with one possible exception, is I imagine the earliest
     example known of Ruskin’s handwriting.
          The one beginning  Come on, good horse  is particularly
     interesting for its reference to  Glendarg Glen  of Scott’s Monastery,
     which Ruskin mentions in the early chapters of Praeterita. The list
     which goes with the manuscripts is, of course, in Wedderburn’s hand. The
     two pieces marked with a  G  on this list I am keeping myself for the
     present at least.
                    Yours sincerely,
                    Charles E. Goodspeed [signed]
Goodspeed perhaps means that the contents of MS IA  escaped total
destruction,  since several of the items in the collection are charred--items
that, according to all descriptions, had always been included in MS IA (see
 Content,  below). Indeed, charring is visible on the very items mentioned in
Goodspeed’s letter-- the list . . . in Wedderburn’s hand,  and the blank
sheets to which  The Monastery  manuscripts are pasted. Fire damage may
account for the loss of the original binding of MS IA (see  Description 
below), as well as for the possible loss of certain items (see  Content,  a,
b, below).
     The items that, as mentioned in his letter, Goodspeed marked  G  on
Wedderburn’s list (i.e., the poems  Papa, what’s time, a figure or a sense 
and  Bosworth Field ) were given to the library in the following year (see
YULG 18, no. 2 [October 1943]: 36), and they are now included in the MS IA
folder. Another item in Wedderburn’s list,  A visit to the Hospice of St.
Bernard,  is notated in Goodspeed’s hand as  sent separately ; this manuscript
also is present in the MS IA folder. (Perhaps that notation explains what
Goodspeed means in his letter by  sending [the remaining MS IA items] to you
to go with the others --the  others  being the  Hospice  manuscript, as well
as the Praeterita manuscript donated in 1941, and other Ruskin manuscripts
purchased by Yale from Goodspeed in earlier years; see Introduction,
 Provenance of the Major Manuscripts,  Sotheby’s 1931.)

Description
     MS IA is no longer bound as a  thin folio  in  red cloth,  as described
by Cook and Wedderburn (Works, 2:530), presumably a binding similar to the red
buckram covering other assemblages, such as MS XB. Its loss is not significant
in itself, since, as Wedderburn remarks on the still extant title page, MS IA
had  been bound since the publication of the Poems in 1891  (i.e., PJR), and
neither the binding nor the selection and ordering of contents were governed
by any noticeable rationale.
     MS IA must still have been covered with red cloth when Goodspeed
acquired it, since his Cat. mentions the contents as  mounted and bound in a
small folio cloth volume.  This description matches that in Sotheby Cat. 1931,
item II of lot 27 (p. 6), as  bound in cloth.  In his 4 November 1942 letter
to Tinker, Goodspeed refers to a  folder of Ruskin manuscripts,  not a volume,
suggesting that the dealer was responsible for disassembling the collection,
although he does not indicate whether the binding was removed before or after
the fire. Certainly, the items of MS IA were loose when delivered to the
library as (or among)  31 sheets of poems  (YULG 17, no. 3 [January 1943]:
59), and Goodspeed could not have retained two poems and sent another
separately, unless he had first removed the binding. The larger items, whose
edges perhaps would have been more exposed to the heat, have been encased in
clear plastic to protect the seared paper.
     The title page, which Goodspeed attributes to Wedderburn, reads as
follows:
     Ruskin MS. / Early Poems. / IA / This has been bound since the
     publication of the Poems in 1891 / and maybe [sic] added to the list of
     MS. given there, as IA. / See The Library Edition II.530.
This sheet, as well as the  Contents,  measures approximately 17.5 X 30 cm.,
which points to the approximate size of the  small folio volume  described in
Goodspeed’s Cat., although these sheets appear to have been trimmed after they
were charred at the edges.
     The remarks about binding on the title page may have been added later,
but the date of the red cloth binding must in any case have been nearly
contemporaneous with the preparation of the Library Edition. In the second
volume (1903) of the Library Edition, the remarks about binding MS IA resemble
those on the title page of IA and narrow the date further to between 1900 and
1903:  this volume has been bound up since Ruskin’s death [1900], and is thus
an addition to the list in the Poems, 1891  (Works, 2:530).
     The title page is followed by Wedderburn’s table of contents, which
should be compared against the contents of the bound volume as described in
Goodspeed, Cat., since Wedderburn’s list is inadequate and confusing. (The
following transcription reproduces the original’s erratic punctuation. The
titles and numbers, which are written in ink, have been checked off in pencil,
perhaps by Goodspeed, whose notations mentioned above are also in pencil.
Likewise attributable to Goodspeed may be a penciled gloss  (2 items)  entered
next to  Calais. )
                                 Contents.
                                                  Sheets 
     Very early MSS.  Come on, good horse  &c.              1-3.
     Papa, what’s time, a figure or a sense.           5.
     Bosworth Field.                                   6.
     Vesuvius; Trafalgar; The Yew.                     7-10.
     Death.                                       11.
     My father’s birthday. 1833.                       12.
     Calais &c. (2 items)                              13.
     Lille, The Meuse &c                          14.
     To his father. Birthday ode 1834.                 15.
      Twelve months all rolling round have past        16.
     Ode to his father 1836.                           17.
     Mont Blanc.                                       18.
     Athens                                       19.
     A visit to the Hospice of St. Bernard.            20
     A Scythian Banquet Song.                     24.25.
     The Broken Chain. (Stanzas 17.26.)                26
     Prose translation of the Iliad   i.  ii 1-127          28
It is unclear what Wedderburn’s column of numbered  sheets  refers to, or why
his enumeration omits 4, 21-23, and 27, since, as will be discussed below, the
numbers cannot be reconciled with consistent features of the individual
manuscripts. Nor can Wedderburn’s numbers, even subtracting the skipped
numbers, be neatly reconciled with Sotheby Cat. 1931, which cites  24 pp.  One
possibility is that Wedderburn was counting sheets on which items were
mounted. The manuscript  Come on good horse,  mentioned in Goodspeed’s letter
to Tinker, is pasted onto a sheet watermarked [(?)]ETOWGOOD FINE, the same
watermark that identifies the paper on which  The Constellations  is mounted
(see  Content,  a and b, below). These papers cannot be proven to have
belonged to the original bound MS IA, since Wedderburn’s title page and
contents are written on quite different paper, watermarked Judicature
Foolscap. However, this style of mounting is common in the older collections
of Ruskin manuscripts, as in MS XI where the early small poetry pamphlets are
mounted onto larger sheets, which are in turn bound together. Further
connecting the mounting sheets for  The Monastery  and  The Constellations 
with the original MS IA, these papers show evidence of slight charring. It is
reasonable to conclude, then, that Wedderburn’s column of numbers refers to
mounting sheets but possibly only for the smaller items; in MS XI, for
example, larger items were not mounted on sheets but attached directly to
binding stubs.
     Other possible discrepancies arise in comparing Wedderburn’s table of
contents with the contents of MS IA as listed in Works, 2:530.  The
Constellations  (no. 21), listed in Works, is omitted from Wedderburn’s table,
unless this item is comprised among  Very early MSS.  (see below,  Content ).
Wedderburn’s table also fails to mention  The Crystal Hunter  (no. 188),
mentioned in the Works list, unless Wedderburn meant to include this ode under
the entry  To his father. Birthday ode 1834.  Otherwise, the two lists of
contents match, the one in Works being ordered according to what Cook and
Wedderburn judged (partly erroneously) to be the items’ dates.
     Somewhat better success may attend comparison of the January 1943
acquisition notice in YULG of  31 sheets of poems  with the numbers of sheets
presently extant--but only by stretching the definition of  sheet.  Putting
aside  Papa whats time  and  Bosworth Field,  which Goodspeed held back, and
 Hospice,  which he sent separately, thirty sheets can be counted, plus one
sixteen-page (or eight-sheet) sewn booklet. If it is credible that a cataloger
counted the booklet as one  sheet,  we can refer to at least one benchmark,
that the present collection corresponds to what Goodspeed originally sent,
when considering the possibility of lost or destroyed items.
     I think it more likely, however, that the YULG count of thirty-one
refers, not to physical sheets, but titles of poems--i.e., the notice ought to
have read  sheets of 31 poems.  One can arrive at that number by counting the
individual titles in Goodspeed, Cat., for both MSS IA and X. MS X is
recognizable in the YULG notice by the listing of one of its items, a 31 March
1836 verse letter to John James Ruskin (see MS X,  Content,  e). If one
discounts this item as listed separately, as well as the poems Goodspeed held
back from MS IA, one can imagine a cataloger at Yale using the Goodspeed Cat.
cursorily to check the titles of pieces delivered to Yale. This would still
tell us that the present collection largely corresponds to what Goodspeed
sent, although it provides no certainty that portions of individual titles--
sheets of  The Monastery  and  The Constellations,  items that can be only
partially reconciled with the earlier descriptions--may not have been lost or
misplaced after, rather than before, the collection arrived at Yale.
     At some point after acquiring MS IA from Goodspeed, Yale enclosed most
of MS IA’s original items in a folder labeled  Early Poems IA  but sorted a
few other items probably from MS IA into other, separate folders labeled  The
Monastery  and  Calais  (see  Content,  a and g, below; neither of these
separate folders is listed in the Beinecke’s card catalog, unlike  Early Poems
IA  and folders containing other items donated by Goodspeed). All three
folders are enclosed in a box labeled  Ruskin, John, 1819-1900 / Miscellaneous
Manuscripts,  along with folders devoted to other manuscripts, which are
unrelated to MS IA.
     Of these manuscripts in the box that are unrelated to MS IA, some were
once included in MS X, a volume that was split up like MS IA and donated by
Goodspeed in 1942: nos. 109, 203, 215, 256, and the  Peace Song,  and the
 Zodiac Song  (see part 1, MS X). Other folders contain manuscripts also
donated by Goodspeed:
     The Laws of Fiesole (Goodspeed, Cat., item 95; Sotheby Cat. 1931, item
          VII of lot 28; YULG 17, no. 3 [January 1943]: 59; fire damaged,
          and no longer  bound in blue cloth ).
     Review of Lindsay’s Sketches of the Hitory of Christian Art (Goodspeed,
          Cat., item 85; Sotheby Cat. 1931, item VII of lot 27; YULG 17, no.
          3 [January 1943]: 59; fire damaged, and no longer bound in the
           red cloth,  of which a fragment is kept in the folder). Listed
          along with this manuscript in YULG is  Lord Lindsay’s Christian
          Art, printed ‘reading copy,’ 1847, with manuscript corrections,  a
          volume now cataloged separately. . . .?
     Undated math problem (not listed in Goodspeed, Cat., but notated on its
          folder as a gift of Goodspeed in 1942, and listed in YULG 17, no.
          3 [January 1943]: 59; fire damaged).
     Lecture V of The Art of England, corrected proofs (neither listed in
          Goodspeed, Cat., nor notated on its folder as a gift of Goodspeed,
          but charred and mounted on rice-paper stubs like other survivors
          of his fire; not mentioned in YULG, unless included among  other
          Ruskiniana  donated by Goodspeed in 1944 [YULG 19, no. 2 (October
          1944): 34]; not specifically listed in the Sotheby’s catalogs,
          unless it was included in Sotheby Cat. 1931, p. 7, lot 30,  Oxford
          Lectures ).
     Roadside Songs of Tuscany, a folder included in the box, although not
          acquired from Goodspeed but from ?. Goodspeed did donate a Ruskin
          letter to Francesca Alexander, Brantwood, 23 March 1886 (YULG 19,
          no. 2 [October 1944]: 34).
     Map of Scandinavia, drawn by Ruskin and dated 18 September 1830,
          included in the box, although not acquired from Goodspeed but from
          ?.
     When I follow tradition in referring to  MS IA,  it is to be understood
that I intend the items as originally bound together under this designation
and that these items can presently be found in Yale’s box  Miscellaneous
Manuscripts --if not in the particular folder labeled  Early Poems IA. 

Content
     Possible discrepancies exist between the items as presently disposed in
the folder MS IA or elsewhere in the box  Miscellaneous Manuscripts  and their
description in earlier accounts. The discrepancies, if they represent actual
losses and not merely confusions arising from inadequate descriptions, might
well be blamed on destruction by Goodspeed’s fire; however, with the exception
of one, rather slender piece of evidence (see [b] below), documentation is too
scanty to confirm if, when, or how the losses occurred. If Goodspeed
disassembled MS IA prior to the fire, it is even possible that he had already
misplaced an item or two or sold them separately, their present whereabouts
unknown.
     a) In the folder  Early Poems IA,  draft for portion of  The Monastery, 
no. 46, single torn sheet, 12 × 20 cm; 34 lines in ink beginning  come on good
horse and let us see,  from the third book of the poem, lines 26-59, as fair-
copied in MS III (with minor variants and deleted lines). On verso, 12 lines
in very rough pencil draft of two passages from the third book of the poem as
fair-copied in MS III:  martin took his task a[s(?)] guide / [(?)]d all the
women did in him confide,  which are interesting variants of lines 86-87 of
fair copy; and, following a horizontal line, draft of lines 14-25 of the fair
copy. On the verso, portions of the pencil draft were lost with tears at the
edges, which is not the case with the ink script on the other side, Ruskin
writing around the tears. Thus, the ink copy must have been written after the
pencil (the lines are sequential, except for lines 86-87), and therefore, I
believe, Ruskin was fair-copying in MS III as he drafted. This is one of
several indications that  The Monastery  draft, far from offering  the
earliest example known of Ruskin’s handwriting,  was composed in 1829 like its
fair copy.
     This manuscript must have been the first item in MS IA when bound since
Wedderburn heads his table of contents  Very early MSS. ‘Come on, good horse’
&c.  Goodspeed’s Cat. also lists it as the first item (79.A.1) and quotes from
the manuscript extensively. Goodspeed describes the manuscript as consisting
of  2 pp.,  and, if he means two sides of one sheet, then this item fully
matches his description.
     As already mentioned ( Description,  above) Ruskin’s sheet is mounted
onto a slightly larger sheet watermarked [(?)]ETOWGOOD FINE, which I assume to
have been cut from the bound MS IA. The mounting sheet, but not the manuscript
itself, shows slight evidence of charring.
     The Yale box  Miscellaneous Manuscripts  holds another folder labeled
 The Monastery,  containing a 12.5 × 20-cm sheet written in pencil, 34 lines
in pencil from the second book of the poem as fair-copied in MS III, lines 29-
63, beginning  now must we leave poor martin there  and continuing to bottom
of its verso,  you are under my protection then I say goodbye.  These lines
together with those on the MS IA sheet thus add up to the Library Edition’s
listing of  The Monastery versified, 80 lines  in the original MS IA (Works,
2:530).
     The Library Edition dates these 80 lines as 1827, but the two
manuscripts suggest no reason for dating their drafts from books II or III
much earlier than their 1829 fair copy in MS III, since the manuscripts are
similar in paper, size, and pencil handwriting. Moreover, Ruskin appears not
to have used longhand earlier than 1828 (see no. 21; see also no. 46 for
further remarks on the dating of  The Monastery ).
     The pencil draft in the separate folder must have formed part of the
second item in MS IA when bound, since Goodspeed’s Cat. lists in second place
(item 79.A.2, following the ink manuscript of  The Monastery )  4 pp. in
pencil [of] a metrical transcription from Scott's Monastery.  But if by  4
pp.  Goodspeed means the rectos and versos of two sheets, and if his item
79.A.2 truly consisted entirely of  The Monastery,  then one sheet is
presently missing.
     Goodspeed left other evidence that he knew of a another sheet. The
pencil draft, like the ink draft in the MS IA folder, is mounted on a slightly
larger, charred sheet (watermark showing only a seated Brittania in an oval
surmounted by a crown). On this sheet, Goodspeed wrote below the manuscript,
 This (with the previous pp.) is a rhymed version of passages from chapter II
of The Monastery (first edition), vol. 1, 182[(?)] / CEG 19[(?)]  (my
emphasis; part of the note lost with trimmed, burnt edges of the mounting
sheet). Since Goodspeed apparently counted  pages  or rectos and versos of
sheets, Goodspeed’s  pp.  might have referred only to the ink manuscript
( come on good horse ), which remains extant, and not to that manuscript plus
another unknown one; but, if so, he would have erred in identifying both the
ink manuscript and the pencil draft as versifying chapter two of Scott’s
novel, for the ink manuscript is taken from chapter three.
     The problem is not clarified by comparing Goodspeed’s records with
Wedderburn’s. Wedderburn’s table of contents included with MS IA lists three
 sheets  of  Very early MSS.,  starting with  come on good horse --this entry
certainly referring to the first, ink manuscript of  The Monastery  but also
to two other unnamed items, whether he means manuscript sheets (recto and
verso) or sheets used to mount manuscripts. Wedderburn’s other two items may
have been Goodspeed’s two sheets ( 4 pp. ) of pencil manuscript of  The
Monastery,  again pointing to a presently missing second sheet. But, again,
the Library Edition specifies  80 lines,  which are presently accountable in
two manuscripts. (Goodspeed’s Cat. fails to mention the total number of lines
in either his  2 pp.  or his  4 pp.  manuscripts, just as, annoyingly, the
Library Edition fails to mention the number of sheets.)
     Thus, in summary, inconclusive evidence points to a missing sheet of
 Monastery  draft--Wedderburn’s third  sheet,  or Goodspeed’s two more
 pages.  To identify that missing sheet, we might look to manuscript, not of
 The Monastery,  but of  The Constellations,  b below. This item, however,
raises problems of its own.
     b) Also in the Yale folder labeled  The Monastery  is a 12.5 × 20-cm
folded sheet, written on all four sides in pencil, beginning  Orpheus and
bootes now.  This is partial draft of  The Constellations,  no. 21, which
survives in other copies. This manuscript is pasted onto a sheet that, like
the mounting for the ink  Monastery  manuscript, is watermarked [(?)]ETOWGOOD
FINE and is slightly charred.
     The Library Edition mentions  The Constellations  as having been bound
in MS IA following  The Monastery  (Works, 2:530), and one might suspect that
here is the third item in Wedderburn’s table of contents as well as
Goodspeed’s additional  Monastery  manuscript, which he misidentified; and,
indeed, this draft of  The Constellations  does physically resemble the pencil
draft of  The Monastery.  But this solution founders, since, first, the folded
sheet comprises four  pages,  not Goodspeed’s two; second, Goodspeed does
separately itemize  The Constellations  as following both the ink and the
pencil  Monastery  manuscripts (Cat., item 79.A.3). Compounding the mystery,
Goodspeed describes a  6 pp.  manuscript, not a four-page folded sheet,
suggesting that a single sheet (i.e.,  2 pp. ) is presently missing from this
poem, as well.
     Wedderburn’s table of contents included with MS IA fails to list  The
Constellations  altogether, unless he included it among the three items of
 Very Early MSS. ; that is, Wedderburn’s  1-3  may correspond to Goodspeed’s
item 79.A.1-3 if Wedderburn counted the ink manuscript of  The Monastery  as
one item, the pencil manuscript as a second, and  The Constellations  as a
third. In both Wedderburn’s table of contents and Goodspeed’s Cat., these
items are followed by  Papa whats time.  But, as already explained,
Goodspeed’s page count cannot be reconciled with the extant manuscripts.
Moreover, why does Wedderburn’s table of contents list  Papa whats time  as a
fifth item, skipping over a fourth enumeration? Could Wedderburn’s  1-3  have
referred only to the individual sheets of  The Monastery,  including the now
missing sheet, while the skipped fourth item in his list was  The
Constellations ? Owing to the sketchiness of Wedderburn’s manner of describing
the contents of MS IA, one returns to Goodspeed’s Cat. as the more accurate
description when MS IA was still bound, and this description clearly indicates
a sheet of  The Constellations  that, like a sheet of the  The Monastery, 
cannot presently be accounted for.
     In Viljoen’s transcription of  The Constellations  (from the MS III
version) among her papers at the Morgan Library, she points to the line
 Orpheus and bootes new [sic]  and remarks,  Here begins version in Goodspeed
ms. ; that is, the MS IA version begins at line 27 of the complete poem as
fair-copied in MS III--and the manuscript does appear fragmentary--and carries
through to the end. Viljoen’s gloss suggests that a sheet (perhaps containing
draft of the opening 26 lines) may have been unavailable to her, as well as to
us (HGVP, box F.X), which may tend to confirm that nothing has been lost or
misplaced at least since MS IA arrived at Yale (see  Description  above;
Viljoen’s transcription is undated, but she had been steadily transcribing
Ruskin material since the late 1920s and probably examined the Goodspeed
collection not long after it came to Yale in 1942).
     As discussed in the note to no. 21, Lancaster holds two photographs (one
of the front and one of the back) of another manuscript of  The
Constellations  different from the extant Yale manuscript, a photograph that
was made in the course of compiling the Library Edition. The existence or
location of the original of this manuscript is unknown, but it was clearly
intermediate between the MS IA draft and the MS III fair copy: it showed a
printed fair copy of the MS IA draft version, with longhand revisions that
were carried into the MS III version. The lost intermediate fair copy tends to
support the probable loss of  Constellations  material from MS IA, since the
photograph shows  orpheus and bootes now  as line 27, proving that draft of
the first 26 lines must once have existed.
     Could the photograph show the lost IA manuscript itself? The photograph
reveals what looks like a binding behind the perimeter of the manuscript. If
this was the  red-cloth, thin folio  of the early descriptions of MS IA, the
photograph must significantly have reduced its actual size (as compared, for
example, with the paper for Wedderburn’s table of contents, which is larger).
Even if the photograph reduced the original, however, it still fails to
resolve the mystery. Instead of the presumably missing two pages, or unfolded
single sheet, of  The Constellations,  the photograph shows a folded sheet
(i.e., 4 pages, although the manuscript itself is unnumbered), with the poem
fair-copied on 1r-v and revisions scrawled on 2r-v. The sheet appears to have
been laid open flat against some sort of backing and photographed, first, from
the front (showing pp. 4 and 1) and, second, from the back (showing pp. 2 and
3). Photographed in this manner, front and back, the manuscript cannot have
been bound permanently along its fold. If the manuscript had been bound, the
photograph would show, first on the left, the back page of an unrelated
manuscript, and then on the right, the first page of  The Constellations, 
followed by the inside spread of the poem. That this is not the case is proved
by a revised line of the poem, which was begun on p. 3, being finished on p.
4, the page to the left of p. 1 in the photograph.
     Of course, the folded sheet shown in the photograph could have been
bound afterward in MS IA. In that case, in order for Goodspeed to arrive at
the six pages mentioned in his Cat., he would have to have counted, along with
the four-page draft extant in MS IA, only the two pages of fair copy on the
folded sheet in the photograph, ignoring the revisions on pp. 3-4. This seems
to me improbable, since, while Goodspeed might have ignored blank pages (see,
e.g., c below), he would not have discounted draft revision.
     c) A copy of  Papa whats time a figure or a sense  (no. 4, as reprinted
and described in RFL, 150-51) is a 12.5 × 20-cm folded sheet. It is listed as
following  The Constellations  in Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.A.4, and in Works,
2:530; and the title occurs following the first entry,  Very Early MSS.,  in
Wedderburn’s table of contents. Goodspeed describes  2 pp. in pencil,  rather
than the expected four pages, presumably because p. 1v is blank, and 2v holds
only the superscription described in RFL, 150 (headnote). The manuscript is
undamaged by fire and lies loose in the Yale folder  Early Poems IA.  
     d) All descriptions (Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.B; Works, 2:530;
Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA) place  Bosworth Field  (no. 69)
following c above. The 19 × 11.5-cm fair copy is undamaged by fire and lies
loose in the Yale folder  Early Poems IA.  Like c above, the manuscript is a
presentation copy, a folded sheet with ink fair copy on the facing inside
spread. Both blank outer pages are used for addresses: on one,  For my Papa /
from J. Ruskin / 1 January 1830 / Age 10¾ years ; on the other,  For my Papa 
and, in John James’s hand,  Aged 10¾ years / 1 Jany 1830.  Accordingly, in
their dated list for MS IA (Works, 2:530), Cook and Wedderburn correctly
ascribe the poem to late 1829--that is, composition in late 1829 for New
Year’s presentation.
     e) Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.C, cites  Poems--Vesuvius, Trafalgar, The
Yew and Death--a similar MS. to the foregoing [i.e., ‘Bosworth Field,’ d
above]. 8 pp. ‘For [sic] my Papa February 8th 1830.’--‘by J. Ruskin aged 11
years this day 8 Feby 1830.’  Goodspeed has associated the four poems (8 pp.
total) with a cover sheet for an unnamed presentation poem, inscribed by
Ruskin  To my Papa / February 8th 1830,  and annotated by his father  by J.
Ruskin aged 11 years / this day / 8 Feby 1830.  This cover sheet, like the
four sheets (8 pp.) containing the poems, lies loose (and undamaged by fire)
in the Yale folder  Early Poems IA.  Almost certainly, only  Vesuvius, 
 Trafalgar,  and  The Yew  (nos. 70-72) belong with the cover sheet, while
 Death  (no. 73) should be separated from the group.
      Vesuvius,   Trafalgar,  and  The Yew  are fair-copied successively on
both sides of three 20.5 × 12.5-cm sheets identical to the cover sheet. When
the folds and torn edges are matched up, the cover proves to have followed the
last poem,  The Yew,  with the address on the outside. This physical evidence
is confirmed independently by the February 1830 dates ascribed to  Vesuvius 
and  Trafalgar,  nos. 70-71, by Ruskin himself in their MS V copies.
     The fourth poem,  Death  (no. 73) probably does not belong to this
group, since it is copied on a separate sheet of a slightly different size
(19.75 × 12.5 cm), different watermark ( J WHA[(?)] / TURKE[(?)] / 18[(?)]  as
compared to  HOLDSWORTH / & / PHILLIPS used for the other three poems), and
unmatching horizontal folds. This copy of  Death  should be dated, rather, by
its MS V copy, which Ruskin assigned to March 1830. It is true, however, that
the lettering style for this presentation copy is very similar to that for the
other three poems, as well as for  Bosworth Field,  d above.
     The early editors, as so often, contribute only obfuscation. In Works,
2:530, the editors group together  Bosworth Field,   Vesuvius,   Trafalgar, 
and  The Yew  under 1829, and they assign  Death  alone to 1830, apparently
pairing  Death  with the cover sheet. This would be the least probable
grouping. The 1 January 1830 (composed 1829)  Bosworth Field  manuscript has
nothing to do, physically, with the other manuscripts, and the other poems are
independently ascribable to 1830, not 1829.
     Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA does properly distinguish
between  Bosworth Field,   Death,  and the trio  Vesuvius,   Trafalgar,  and
 The Yew  as three separate items. His sketchy description does not mention
the 8 February 1830 cover sheet, much less whether it might still have been
physically attached to the trio of poems at this time. It is possible,
however, that his cryptic  7-10  for  Vesuvius,   Trafalgar,  and  The Yew 
included the cover sheet to make a total of four  sheets.  
     f) All descriptions (Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.D; Works, 2:530;
Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA) list  My Father’s Birthday  for 1833
( The month of May, the month of May,  no. 178), which is in the Yale folder
 Early Poems IA.  Goodspeed describes the manuscript as  1½ pp., 4to --i.e.,
two 20 × 25-cm sheets, one of them taken up by the poem on its recto and its
verso, and the other devoted only to the address  To my Father / 10th May
1833. The sheets, burned on the left and right edges, are enclosed in plastic.
     Burd ascribes his printing of the poem (RFL 277-78) to RMS I (i.e., MS
XI), but I have been unable to locate a copy of the poem either in that
volume’s table of contents or in the volume itself. I would assume, therefore,
that Burd has confused MS XI with MS IA, except that his printing shows a few
slight variants from the MS IA copy. These may be errors or carry-overs from
the Library Edition printing.
     g) The parts of Account of a Tour on the Continent, no. 180, as they
were described in earlier accounts of MS IA, all appear to be extant, either
in the folder  Early Poems IA  or elsewhere in the box  Miscellaneous
Manuscripts.  In the folder  IA  are two sheets (20.2 × 25.2 cm) containing
copies (perhaps draft or semifinal copy) of the first five poems (without
their prose sections) of no. 180, in the order those poems appear in the fair
copy, MS IX. Ruskin numbered the lines of these poems sequentially--that is,
without starting his numbering anew with each poem--showing that he had
established their order for the fair copy in MS IX. The first of these two
sheets contains the following:
      Calais  (poem only, lines numbered by Ruskin 1-24, complete as fair-
          copied in MS IX; copy in John James’s hand).
      Cassel  (poem only, untitled in manuscript, lines numbered by Ruskin
          25-51, i.e., lines 1-27 as fair-copied in MS IX; copy in John
          James’s hand from line 25 to 42, and in Ruskin’s hand from line 43
          to 51 [i.e., Ruskin’s hand starts with the ecclesiastical
          procession,  While far beneath in long array,  etc.).
     A key for a code, nearly every letter of the alphabet represented by a
          code symbol (not employed in any known manuscript; see no. 99), at
          bottom of recto and in Ruskin’s hand.
As noted, this sheet is largely in John James’s hand. It must therefore be
Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.E,  Calais. (MS., 2 pp., 4to, in the hand of Ruskin’s
father),  although the dealer is incorrect to ascribe the copy to John James
entirely. By  4to,  Goodspeed means the large size of the sheet. Although only
slightly darkened by fire on one edge, the sheet is enclosed in plastic.
     The second sheet of this manuscript resumes  Cassel  and includes three
more poems:
      Cassel  (poem only, lines numbered by Ruskin 52-62, i.e., lines 28-38
          as fair-copied in MS IX).
      Lille  (poem only, lines numbered by Ruskin 63-112, i.e., complete as
          fair-copied in MS IX).
      Brussels  (poem only, lines numbered by Ruskin 113-73, i.e., complete
          as fair-copied in MS IX).
      The Meuse  (poem only, written sideways in the margin, front side of
          the sheet, i.e., the side with  Cassel  and part of  Lille ;
          complete as fair-copied in MS IX).
This second sheet is entirely in Ruskin’s hand. It must be Goodspeed, Cat.,
item 79.G, from which he quotes eight lines of the poem  Lille,  and which he
describes identically to item 79.E above as  2 pp., 4to.  This sheet is more
seriously damaged than its mate and is enclosed in plastic.
     This second sheet is what Wedderburn lists as  Lille, The Meuse &c  in
his table of contents, while the first sheet must be represented by one of the
items in the entry  Calais &c (2 items).  As I remarked above ( Description ),
however, the penciled gloss  (2 items)  appears to be Goodspeed’s.
     In a separate folder in the Yale box and labeled  Calais,  more material
from no. 180 is fair-copied on a folded sheet, 12.6 × 20.2 cm. This is
Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.F ( Prose and verse--Calais, Passing the Alps, Milan
Cathedral, Andernacht and St. Goar--4 pp. ), and presumably the second of the
 (2 items),  according to the notation next to  Calais  in Wedderburn’s table
of contents. (Wedderburn’s description  Calais &c.  could fit either of the
two sheets starting with  Calais,  prose or verse, with the  &c.  standing for
the other poems on the respective sheets. His ascription of the single digit
 13  to the item(s) is as obscure as his other enumerations.) This small
folded sheet escaped fire damage, as did other manuscripts of its size in IA.
     Ruskin numbered lines of poetry on this manuscript, as well. It consists
of the following:
      Calais  (prose only, complete as fair-copied in MS IX).
      Passing the Alps  (poem; lines numbered by Ruskin 324-59; a unique copy
          of this poem, neither fair-copied in MS IX nor drafted in MS
          VIII).
      Milan Cathedral  (poem; lines numbered by Ruskin 360-77; a unique copy,
          neither fair-copied in MS IX nor drafted in MS VIII).
      Andernacht  (poem; lines numbered by Ruskin 378-403; complete as fair-
          copied in MS IX and printed Works, 2:354 n.--i.e., not the main
          copytext used for Works, 2:353-54, which is from a later revision
          of  Andernacht ).
      St. Goar  (poem; lines numbered by Ruskin 404-29; complete as fair-
          copied in MS IX and printed Works, 2:359 n. 1--i.e., not the main
          copytext used for Works, 2:359-60, which is from a later revision
          of  St. Goar ).
This copy of selected prose and verse--like the two sheets containing the
poems  Calais,   Cassel,   Lille,   Brussels,  and  The Meuse --probably dates
from relatively early in Ruskin’s project, no. 180, since  Andernacht  and
 St. Goar  were later revised, perhaps sometime in 1835, for publication in
Friendship’s Offering (see note to no. 180).
     h) Goodspeed, Cat. (item 79.H) and Works (2:530) list Ruskin’s 1834
birthday address to his father, no. 192, together with  The Crystal Hunter, 
no. 188. Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA is more ambiguous, but he
probably means to include both poems under the entry  To his father. Birthday
ode 1834  since, in the presentation copy itself,  The Crystal Hunter  begins
on the verso of the prefatory address  My Dearest Father.  (In MS VIII,
however, no. 192 is headed differently as  The Address  and drafted separately
from no. 188.)
     Goodspeed cites  3 pp.  for this manuscript, an error that seems
unaccountable except as a confusion with j below, which is fair-copied on the
same size paper. The 1834 poem is fair-copied on four 25 × 20-cm sheets (i.e.,
8 pp.), badly charred on the top and bottom edges and sealed in plastic, and
contained in the Yale folder  Early Poems IA.  The sheets are written on seven
sides and numbered 1-7 by Ruskin, with the final page left blank except for
 To my Father.  On p. 7, there is a notation, almost obliterated by the burnt
edge,  [Johns(?)] poetry / May 1834. 
     This birthday poem marks a departure from Ruskin’s earlier method of
fashioning presentation copies, which was to fold a single sheet sideways to
form a small (approximately 12 × 20-cm) pamphlet. Here, two columns of text
are written on a full sheet broadside, and two more on the verso broadside.
The text on the verso is written upside-down to the text on the front, so
that, when the sheet is flipped over, the text still appears right-side-up.
These more spacious presentations become the rule after the mid-1830s.
     i)  Twelve months all rolling round have past,  no. 164, is listed in
all descriptions: Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA; Goodspeed, Cat.,
item 79.I (as  another birthday poem to his father, 4 pp., undated ); and
Works, 2:530. The poem is untitled and undated but listed as 1831 in the
Library Edition. Like other items of its size in MS IA, it was unaffected by
fire.
     When this manuscript is compared against Ruskin’s ode for his father’s
birthday of 1831, bound in MS XI (see  Content,  g), the two manuscripts can
be seen to match in every particular: they are both 20 × 12.3-cm folded sheets
of light blue-green paper, display the same  copperplate  hand (Ruskin’s fancy
scripts can vary, but the capital letters in these two manuscripts are clearly
imitated from the same source), and even match up in their horizontal folds.
     Obviously, when the MS XI manuscript declares at the bottom of 1v that
 I here do beg to give you an ensample,  the reader is meant to look for the
 ensample  at the top of the folded insert--i.e., what is now the MS IA
manuscript--which begins  Twelve months all rolling round have past.  In his
printing of the MS XI ode, Burd breaks off with  I here do beg to give you an
ensample  but remarks in a note that the draft in MS VIII extends beyond this
line, adding  fifty-four lines to illustrate both the comic and ‘flowery’
styles of poetry  and that these additional lines begin  Twelve months all
rolling round have past  (RFL 256). The fair copy of those lines (albeit with
revisions from the MS VIII version) became separated from the fair copy of the
poem’s opening.
     For the relation between Ruskin’s birthday odes to his father for 1831
and 1832, and for prior confusion over dating of these odes, see nos. 118a and
164.
     j) All descriptions (Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.J; Works, 2:530;
Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA) list Ruskin’s 1836 birthday poem for
his father,  Congratu--  (no. 231). Goodspeed describes this manuscript as  3
pp., 4to. --correctly, if he was counting sides of sheets, as usual. The text
is written on three sides of two 20 × 25-cm sheets, with the fourth given to
the address  To my Father / May 10th 1836.  Like h above and unlike birthday
presentation poems of earlier years,  Congratu--  is written out using the
full sides of sheets, not half-pages pamphlet style--only here, the text is
written top to bottom, not broadside as in h. With their left and right edges
charred, the sheets are enclosed in plastic and contained in the folder  Early
Poems IA. 
     k) All descriptions (Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.K; Works, 2:530;
Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA) list  Mont Blanc.  This 19.7 × 13.2-
cm sheet, written on both sides, is correctly noted in all accounts as a
transcription in Margaret Ruskin’s hand. Although the Library Edition declares
this  the only complete copy  (Works, 2:468), the manuscript can only be
deemed longer than the MS VII version, not necessarily complete, since the
writing extends top to bottom on both sides of this torn half-sheet. For
speculation about the poem’s dating, see  Undatable Pieces,  B. The manuscript
is not damaged by fire and lies in the folder  Early Poems IA. 
     l) All descriptions (Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.L; Works, 2:530;
Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA) list  Athens  (no. 135), a 19.7 ×
12.2-cm folded sheet. None of the descriptions mentions the handwriting,
however, which appears to be Margaret Ruskin’s. The title and one correction
are in pencil (possibly Ruskin’s own hand), the stanzas in ink (Margaret’s
hand?). The copy contains only seven unnumbered stanzas of this much longer,
although unfinished, poem; but, since the manuscript is written on only three
sides, it may represent all that had been composed at the time of its
transcription. If so, Goodspeed (Cat., item 79.L) and Cook and Wedderburn
(Works, 2:530) are correct to attribute this manuscript to 1831, while the
entire poem should be dated 1831-32, as Cook and Wedderburn correctly note
(Works, 2:537). For complete information on dating, see no. 135. This
manuscript is undamaged and lies loose in the folder  Early Poems IA. 
     m) All descriptions (Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.M; Works, 2:530;
Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA) list  A Visit to the Hospice of St.
Bernard  (no. 209). The manuscript consists of 12 sheets, 19.5 × 25 cm,
watermarked 1834, with the pages numbered 1-24 by a hand other than Ruskin’s.
The text is neatly disposed on hand-ruled lines. This fair copy, as the
Library Edition remarks,  goes no further than the opening of Scene 5  (Works,
1:505 n. 1); specifically, p. 24 ends with the phrase  torrent of the Drance,
whose dark waters have worn.  Since this phrase extends to the bottom right
corner, further fair copy could have existed, although the extant draft in MS
VIII continues only through some portion of scene 6. The sheets of the fair
copy are charred on the left and right edges, and encased in plastic. The ink
is badly faded, especially from p. 8 to the end. The sheets are contained in
the folder  Early Poems IA. 
     n) All descriptions (Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.N; Works, 2:530;
Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA) list  A Scythian Banquet Song  (no.
259). Goodspeed’s description of  4 pp.  must be revised to take account of
fire damage. Of the  4 pp. --or two 19.5 × 25-cm sheets (one watermarked 1837)
written on both sides, now in the folder  Early Poems IA --one sheet has been
separated at its fold into two 19.5 × 12.5-cm sheets, so that the manuscript
is now encased in a total of three plastic sleeves. The manuscript suffered
especially intrusive charring, costing some lines at the top and bottom of the
sheets, which have been trimmed in places.
     The manuscript holds only the first 16 stanzas of the 27-stanza poem,
presented in the manner of h above--the stanzas written in two columns
broadside and continued in the same style on the verso. All four sides of the
original sheets are filled, suggesting that this fair copy could have once
continued onto further sheets, but Goodspeed’s  4 pp.  indicates that only
these two sheets were included in the bound MS IA. Wedderburn, in his table of
contents, enumerates the manuscript as  24.25.,  as if it consisted of two
sheets, but his meaning is obscure, since he does not so designate other
manuscripts consisting of multiple sheets. The Library Edition fails to
clarify whether the MS IA copy, as the editors knew it, was complete (Works,
2:57 n.).
     The manuscript is early enough to record a change in title,  <Th> A
Scythian <Drinking Song> Banquet Song,  and the headnote differs from the
published version:  The taste of the Scythians <if we ma> in household
furniture if we may trust to Herodotus was somewhat peculiar: their drinking
cups for instance, being generally the skulls of their enemies  (cf. Works,
2:57). A few minor changes in wording (e.g.,  <darkness> silence,  and
 <waves> breeze,  in the final lines of stanzas 1 and 7, respectively) are
accounted for in the published text. Otherwise, the manuscript is neatly
written, perhaps too neat to be the original draft that,  as appears from
letters to W. H. Harrison,  was composed  in a single day, before March 1838 
(Works, 2:57 n. 1). Note that, in another letter to Harrison of 1 August 1838,
Ruskin still entitles the poem a  Drinking Song  (Works, 2:69), so the MS IA
copy--or at least the revisions on this copy--may date from after that time.
     o) All descriptions (Goodspeed, Cat., item 79.O; Works, 2:530;
Wedderburn’s table of contents for MS IA) list  The Broken Chain,  no. 245a.
This is a 21 × 13.5-cm, 16-page sewn booklet, with pp. 2-10 numbered by the
original hand and with pp. 11-16 left blank and uncut. This fair copy, which
is in John James’s hand, contains only stanzas 17-26 of part V; however,
nothing has been lost from MS IA, since Wedderburn’s table of contents
specifies  Stanzas 17.26,  and both Works (2:530) and Goodspeed, Cat. concur.
The manuscript is undamaged by fire and lies loose in the folder  Early Poems
IA. 
     p) The 1832 prose translation of the Iliad, misdated as 1842 by Cook and
Wedderburn (Works, 2:530; see no. 160a), is contained in the MS IA folder.
This is a fair copy on six 31.5 × 19-cm sheets; each sheet was folded once
vertically, so the sheets could be assembled as a quire, forming a booklet
with 16 × 19-cm pages, each page holding two vertical columns of text. The
paper is hand-ruled and the text obsessively neat, resembling (except in its
double-column format) the Sermon Books, MSS IIA-E.
     In its present condition, the quire has been separated into individual
sheets, each sheet laid flat and enclosed in clear plastic, owing to fire
damage. Thus, each sheet consists of four pages. Since neither the pages nor
the sheets are numbered, the following list conjecturally orders them. The
pages are identified by their first and last words:
     Sheet 1 (p. 1,  Now tell  through  Argos far ; p. 2,  from her  through
           hecatombs un ; pp. 23-24, blank).
     Sheet 2 (p. 3,  paid  through  dark ; p. 4,  eyed  through  me that ;
          pp. 21-22, blank).
     Sheet 3 (p. 5,  the value  through  much more ; p. 6,  than thee 
          through  the dark- ; pp. 19-20, blank).
     Sheet 4 (p. 7,  eyed  through  orator of ; p. 8,  whom  through  not
          me ; p. 17,  ed words  through  of ten  [end of fair copy, column
          left incomplete, with  127  (i.e., line 129) in pencil and in
          Wedderburn’s hand added at end]; p. 18, blank).
     Sheet 5 (p. 9,  and I will  through  left to me ; p. 10,  to turn 
          through  Greeks took ; p. 15,  the Greeks  through  and spoke ; p.
          16,  Hear me  through  with wing ).
     Sheet 6 (p. 11,  to Chryses  through  with the ; p. 12,  hecatomb 
          through  ascen- ; p. 13,  ded soon  through  of the Greeks ; p.
          14,  Then answered  through  ships of ).
None of the manuscript is missing, since Wedderburn’s table of contents and
Works 2:50 specify the translation as extending only to book 2, line 127.
Goodspeed (Cat., item 79.P) describes  16 pp., double column,  an odd way of
counting since he includes only the full double-column pages, omitting p. 17
with its single incomplete column.