Apple Pie by Grandma Ople

"This was my grandmother's apple pie recipe. I have never seen another one quite like it. It will always be my favorite 
and has won me several first place prizes in local competitions. I hope it becomes one of your favorites as well!" -- Granddaughter Ople  


1 recipe pastry for a 9 inch double crust pie 
 
1/2 cup unsalted butter 
 
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
 
1/4 cup water 
 
1/2 cup white sugar 
 
1/2 cup packed brown sugar 
 
8 Granny Smith apples - peeled, cored and sliced 

Directions
1.Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (220 degrees C). Melt the butter in a saucepan. Stir in flour to form a paste. Add water, white sugar, and brown sugar, and bring to a boil. Reduce temperature and let simmer.

2.Place the bottom crust in your pan. Fill with apples, mounded slightly. Cover with a lattice-work crust. Gently pour the sugar and butter liquid over the crust. Pour slowly so that it does not run off.

3.Bake 15 minutes in the preheated oven. Reduce the temperature to 350 degrees F (175 degrees C). Continue baking for 35 to 45 minutes, until apples are soft.



Butter Flaky Pie Crust

"Butter makes this buttery flaky recipe the perfect crust for your pie!" -- Pie Crust Champion 

1 1/4 cups all-purpose flour
 1/4 teaspoon salt
 1/2 cup butter, chilled and diced
 1/4 cup ice water


Directions

1.In a large bowl, combine flour and salt. Cut in butter until mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Stir in water, a tablespoon at a time, until mixture forms 
a ball. Wrap in plastic and refrigerate for 4 hours or overnight.

2.Roll dough out to fit a 9 inch pie plate. Place crust in pie plate. Press the dough evenly into the bottom and sides of the pie plate.



Serving Suggestions

1. Serve apple pie on medium saucer with a scoop of vanilla ice cream. 
2. Serve apple pie on medium saucer with a sprig of mint to add color and elegance.
3. Serve apple pie on medium saucer by adding nuts or fruit to make it look more attractive and flavorful.