XVII. The 5th. Commandment.

(IV v-15)
The 12 verse of the XX chapter of Exodus, We have now considered the first table of laws, that is, the four first commandments, which are only connected with the sacred duties we owe to God. But the six last commandments, which may be considered as a second table, regard the duties which we owe to man, not exclusively, as the duties which we are here commanded to observe toward man, are for although man is their especial object yet their fulfilment recognizes the authority of God. The subject of our meditation to day is the 5th commandment, or the first rule of this second code, being an exceedingly important one, and bringing home to us many most obligatory duties. It is placed, we see, the first, and very much emphasis is laid on it, because it is grounded on a principle which constitutes the basis of all government. even of that of the Church of God  Now it may be remarked, that although the ordinances of God are never minute, yet there is no general principle which they do not touch. and this commandment enforces that necessary control, which all parents ought to exercise over their children, by directing those children unhesitatingly to obey them. The expression of this commandment is peculiar. It is not Obey thy father, and thy mother, But, the commandment tells us to honour them. For had it been more specific, a difficulty would have arisen  There may frequently be parents ungodly, unscriptural and who; being ungodly, would command ungodliness. Are these to. Are we to disobey nine commandments, that we may obey the tenth. Innumerable difficulties would thus have immediately occurred, which are all obviated by the different wording fo the commandment  For we may yield a proper, a very great degree of respect, of deference, and of honour we may treat our parents with unfailing kindness, all submission, and all possible obedience. and means are thus furnished to the child of adopting a better path, than that pointed our to him by his parent and yet entirely, as well as verbally, complying with the commandment. For, this general, and constant submission is far more characteristic than any act of grudging and murmuring obedience, which is besides, not what is demanded  But this injunction tells, with increased power, upon those chilren who have Christian parents  How much more are they bound to yield a willing honour to such parents. Unless there is a demand against right which is almost impossible, how ready should be their obedience to parents who make the testimony of truth their general, and constant rule of conduct. And they must be obeyed not only to please them, but as an act of obedience to a higher parent, not that we may not disturb their peace, but that we may obey God. If you do not, you rebel against heaven, against your creator, who had inscribed his requirement on this page -, even the laws of man have given parents a guardian power over their children, in compliance with the will, of God. Such obedience is the foundation of all the harmony of society of the welfare of individuals, of families, of kingdoms of nations. Who are to be the kings the queens, the nobelman, the statesmen the heads of houses, and of families, of the next generation? the children of this one And what are we to expect from these if due authority is not to be yielded to the virtuous parent, if children are to be sub

(IV r-16)
mitted to their won guidance, and judgement, if they are to be left to speak their own words, and find their own pleasure and walk in their own ways, how can we expect those to be able to govern, who have never been governed, or, that evil passions will eradicate themselves, which have never been eradicated in youth. How can youth be prepared for situations like these, without yielding obedience to this commandment, for no one can doubt, that a constant submission to the parents authority, would terminate in a better state of the nation in general. 
This commandment of course supposes the parents to be in the full and right discharge of their duties. Now here is a field for deep consideration on the part of the parent. For, it will be generally the case that when children are found dishonouring their parents, those parents will be found to have first dishonoured themselves. They may have departed from their Christian and moral character, and the children may have perceived this, & despised their parents, or perhaps they have exercised indiscreet severity, or kindness. against both of which we are warned, "He that spares the rod spoils the child." & "Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath. but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. For, if indiscreet kindness be ever exercised, it will be always found that it must afterwards be expiated by an otherwise unnecessary severity, and unimaginable evil may be produced by this system of alternate undulgence and rigour, entire liberty, or severe restraint. but, above all, it should be remember'd that if parents wish to see their off spring grow up in any nurture, & admonition, it must be, in the language of the apostle, "that of the lord"
There is a promise attached to this commandment, about which very much has been said, and many disputes have arisen. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Now, are we to suppose say some, that if children obey their father and their mother, their days are to be prolonged, and thy are to have longer life than those who are disobedient to their parents. Certainly not  All experience goes against this opinion, there has never been found any greater length of life vouchsafed to those who have yielded constant obedience

(IV v-16)
and that under the Jewish dispensation, as well as undr ours. Joseph, Josiah, died young with many others who all their lives had yielded the most perfect obedience to their parents. How then can we account for this clause in the commandment for the promise it contains appears not to have been realized. 
We must therefore find some other interpretation of this commandment  Now, it may be remarked, that this code of laws was addressed to the whole congregation, not to individuals, even although the expression used is Thou The commandment is given to the nation, the promise therefore must be extended to the nation  And if so, it has been fulfilled. For we have before stated that the obedience of every individual to his parents, would create such a healthiness in the morals of the people as would enable them to remain long in the promised land in despite of all the efforts of surrounding nations to remove them or shake their stability. Oh. how a nation would prosper. if this commandment were constantly obeyed. Let me see such a nation and let me see the power that can overthrow them. No, it would go down in its prosperity to the conflagation of the earth. And (in illustration of this), the continuation of the dwelling of the Jews in Canaan, was in exact correspondence with the continuation of their obedience to their heavenly & earthly parents, so important is it that one generation should hand down the truth to that which succeeds it  Again, in the 6th Chapter of Ephesians, it appears as if the Apostle was addressing individuals only, yet he extends the same promise. But we must remember that, the epistle was addressed "to the saints that are at Ephesus, although the same phraseology is used as if the apostle was addressing an individual, and the same interpretation may be therefore likewise given to this passage. 
The neglect of this commandment was, I have no doubt, the reason of the first corruption of the Jews and If it had been always persevered in, I am assured that there now would not have been so many nations in such lamentable darkness, ignorance, and misery, And, if applied to individuals only, what a solace to the child at the death of his parent, if he has never violated this commandment, and what a comfort will the parent always ex

BOOK V

(V r-1)
perience in the child. and such children would gradually rise up into a nation possessing such a healthiness of morals, & purity of principle. as even to do away with the necessity of magistracy, and handing those morals and principles down from generation to generation, and watching the convulsions and revolutions of all other nations on the earth, itself unchanged, and unchangeable. 
I would now finally say to all parents here assembled. Regard not this commandment as a means of obtaining unjust power, over your children, and to the children, consider the precept, consider - it well not as clothing your parents with a terrible authority. but rather with a gentle and salutary power, to be exercised for the purpose of instructing, and protecting you. so that there may be a holy and mutual agreement between parent and child, on the one side of forbearance, on the other of obedience, & honour