XIX. The ninth & tenth commandments.

(V v-2)
The 16 verse. of the 20 Chapter of Exodus, We have hitherto advanced in our consideration of the commandments, as far as this most important one. one indeed which embodies in itself those general principles which are common to all the commandments. principles of Charity and love, which if continually adhered to, would, in fact render the 5 last commandments at least, entirely unnecessary. Now, this precept as applied to direct false testimony in court of law, requires no illustration, but the precept forbids more than this. it forbids, secondly, the producing, directly, or indirectly, of any false impression whatever, against any one or the leaving unaltered any such impression accidentally produced. It may be asked whether we may not bear a true witness against our neighbour. If the intention of such a testimony be merely to expose and derade him, I answer, certainly not. Ask God, will he not tell us that he hath cast our sins into the depths of the sea. shall then we employ ourselves in searching in to and exposing those of others, Every such witnessing against our neighbour, unless for the glory of God, or the good of man, is a violation of Christian charity, and of this commandment. Let us not regard the world as hateful, and hating one another. for out of such a disposition aridse wars and fightings among you wars, and rumours of wars. Let us remember that saying in which we are told that all other commandments are briefly comprehended. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. and thus so far we should secure ourselves at least from all danger of offending by a violation of our duty towards man. Oh, if every one would speak good of his neighbour, when consistent with truth, or at least be silent when it was not so, how different would the state of the world be in general, would not our swords be beaten into ploughshares and our spears into pruninghooks, and the spirit of love and peace, be infus

(V r-3)
ed into all that we say, and do.
I would lastly remark, that there is not a more important precept in the code than the one before us. And into the violation of how many is he drawn, who dares to reject it. Can he be said to love his brother, who beareth witness of evil against him, and are we not told that whoso hateth his brother is a murderer. And how shall we escape from the violation of Christian charity, if we do not adhere to this precept. of that charity which Paul affirms to be greater than either hope or faith. and why is it so. Without the one, faith, we cannot lay hold on salvation. nor enter into the kingdom of heaven. and without hope what should we be in the world. how we sustain affliction, or prevent ourselves from an entirely. sinkin under earthly trials. But the Apostle never meant to say that charity was greater in its operation. but that it was so in its duration Faith being the substance of things not seen must end when the things hoped for are obtained, and hope must, of course terminate in the. same manner, when it is in full fruition. both faith and hope therefore, terminate with this life. But Charity the everlasting principle, the bond of fellowship among the immortal spirits, yes, and also between God and man, shall endure for ever and ever, the very foundation of the hapiness of Heaven, and without which heaven itself could have no existence. 
The next and last commandment is another illustration of the same principle, and it may be remarked, that there is peculiarity in it  All the others, verbally at least, forbid only plain and outward actions, but this addresses itself to the heart. The first forbids Idolatry, the second the making of, or bowing down to, graven images, the third swearing, & the fourth the profanation of the sabbath. and so on. A previous commanding forbids stealing, but this is more strict, and forbids us even to wish for any thing belonging to our neighbour. And there are few which take in a greater sweep than

(V v-3)
this precept, extending itself to all the dealings of commerce, the individuals engaged in which are peculiarly liable to become guilty of its violation  We must remember that the least wish of any thing belonging to our neighbour, nay, perhaps too great admiration of it is capable of immediately alienating us from God, an alienation which I fear takes place every hour of our lives, It applies to those who enter into the world, as to those who are utterly abstracted from it. to the rich, as to the poor, for there are few, who are so satiated with possession, as to wish for nothing more, and who would not therefore verge on the violation of this commandment, or perhaps lose sight of it altogether, if they saw that something in the possession of another. Witness the example of David, & consider the most beautiful illustration of this disposition, which was given him by Nathan the prophet  Such then is the general character of these most wonderful commandments, And we may infer, from the cursory view we have been taking of them, there vast importance to the diffusion. and support of the gospel, for that depends much on a steady practical development of our Christian principles. If the members of the church united themselves more together, and endeavoured to conform more to the spirit which is breathed through the whole of the Christian religion, would not their united strength be more than irresistible & the ninth commandment is always the means of consolidating our moral strength, before we go forth to the combat, that, becoming blind to the infirmities of our fellows and looking into our own with the eye of a lynx, we may so feel our need of each othr, our power in unity, as may keep [our band(?)] in peace and gentleness with themselves, and with all men, Oh, let us cultivate the spirit of that most holy commandment, nor suffer the smallest feeling of enmity to our brother to remain hiding itself unchecked, in secret, let us not endeavour to excuse such a feeling of dislike, by the fact of its existing in others  But let us always say to ourselves, 

(V r-4)
This man may have sinned, may have done something worthy of my hatred, but am I therefore to hate him, He may have sinned, should I sin with him, Let me hate the sin, but pity the sinner. Finally, let me exhort you to make these precepts your companions, to dwell upon them, to examine into them. and above all, not to let the consciousness of our inability to fulfil them entirely, hindr us from endeavouring to obey them. 